Tackling on a course where my coding knowledge is limited proved to be a true challenge for me, but a welcomed one. From the start of the semester after Professor Aucher mentioned that our first project will be exploratory in nature, I knew I wanted to work with police data, specifically United States police data as a whole since the rise in civil unrest and activism has been on the rise in the last few years. Finding data that collected police information on the entire United States proved to be somewhat difficult and instead I chose to focus on data pertaining to the NYPD, since this is where I live and I assume most of my classmates live as well. 

As I was collecting and aggregating my data for the exploratory project I noticed that d3.js takes every individual data point and shows it all on the SVG. I never realized this until I was looking at my graphs and was wondering why there were many “rectangles” or “circles” plotted in my SVG space. I had to return to my data and consolidate it once again, which proved to be somewhat time consuming since I had to individually make separate files for each of my visualizations and graphs.

During our first round of critiques, I was told to separate all the categories in the claim types and make an individual graph for each. This was difficult to complete since I kept getting mixed up when stating my variables in my code and would get them tangled up with one another; therefore, the entire visualization would be thrown off. I instead focused on choosing the top three claim categories with the highest payouts and consolidate my data once again. 

At this point my desired visualizations were finally coming to fruition and I was happy with the end result. I added context through HTML and touched up the layout through CSS. I wanted my page to read like a newspaper article. I did this by cross-referencing my page with a news article page and adjusting the margins, line spacing, and background color; I wanted the reader to have a smooth transition from line to line. I also stayed away from brightly colored graphics since I felt that it may be too distracting to the reader and left them out until the very end when the viewer was left with the bar chart showcasing which borough had the most claims. 

The critiques definitely helped me hone in on what I already was working with and how to better present my visualizations to my audience and even see some area for improvements where I had no idea I could perfect. The final project did not differ much from the prospectus I outlined. I knew that for the data I was going to work with, a line graph and bar chart were the best options to use to deliver the message. I wish I did end up using a map of New York City, however finding which precinct was responsible for each settlement proved to be too time consuming. 

The idea for the narrative project came to me while working on my exploratory project. I was listening to music and thought to myself “hold on, Spotify collects your data, why don’t I look into how I can request it and visualize my listening history?”. I was excited to get started on this project because it is more personal than the first project and it contains data that pertains to me since I have some emotional connection to certain artists and bands. 

In the beginning I knew I wanted to incorporate a calendar that would work as a heat map to show which days I listened to the most music. While doing some research on how to get started, I realized that the task at hand was going to be too challenging to complete. I then opted to switch the calendar visualization with a treemap, which worked just as well to deliver the message. I also wanted to include an aspect to the data to make it more personalized, rather than having the viewer see a collection of random artists on a computer screen. Therefore, I included a rating system that was included to each artist/band I listened to in that year. After completing the first project I realized that the coding became a lot easier than expected since I was so used to writing the scripts for many of my visualizations. There were however some instances where I had to do some research to help me finalize certain aspects of the code. I followed the same outline for my narrative website since I was content with the outcome. The only major differences are probably the different fonts and background color. 

The critique helped me stay on the objective since I was getting too excited on thinking up of ways to visualize my listening history. Many of the visualizations that I drafted up conveyed the same message and to help fix this I consolidated my graphs to three that all had a unique purpose and message in the final draft. 

If I had more time and resources I would have allocated more time to spruce up the website with fancy layouts, colors, and fonts to make them seem like the type of visualizations you would see in news articles such as The New York Times. I would have also loved to spend more time researching on different methods of displaying the data, since I only worked with visualizations I am familiar with. As I mentioned above, my idea for a calendar heat map was scrapped since I could not come up with a stable code for it. The critiques were a huge help since my peers and professor helped point out details that I might have easily overlooked or could include to the project. Some of the major challenges faced were coding issues I would stumble upon while perfecting the final product. I would end up fixing one piece of the puzzle but then that would cause something else to break. Luckily I was not alone when finishing both projects and was able to meet with Aucher who helped me troubleshoot some of the bugs I came across. 

The class as a whole helped me perfect a craft I thought I never had much interest in. I have a background in statistics and the only visualizations I have ever done were simple statistical tables that only housed numbers and not much else. I have to thank Professor Aucher and my classmates who helped along the way to produce a portfolio that I am proud of. 
